--- PAGE 3 ---
General Outline the Geology at Philmont Ranch
of
Note: This outiine is written the information of those who intend
for
to superviseg eologica ctivities Scouts at the Ranch. It is not
of
for the use individual Scouts.
of
The Ranch occupies about 200 square miles in northwestern
New Mexico, located along the eastern slopes the Cimarron Range,
of
which is the name the easternmost of the several north-south trending
of
ridges that southward continuet heF ront Range Colorado. The scenery
of
is varied. eastern portion belongs to the flat and relatively feature-
The
less plains known as the Great Plains that stgetch from Mexico north
e beyond Alberta, accompanying the Rocky Mountains on the east. The central
part the Ranch property includes several steep, forested ridgesothat
of
rise appreciably above the level theG reatP lains.T heirw estern
of
endings merge with the high, completely forested mountains that make up the
western part the Ranch.
of
A view Tooth-of-Time Ridge w i l l show that the vicinity
from
Cimarron and the Philmont Ranch headquarters is a relatively low area,
of
surrounded on the north by the Raton Basin plateau, a great
mass of
Cretaceous and early Tertiary shales and sandstones; and surrounded on
the south by several other, higher plateaus, which Ortega Mesa is one
of
of the largest. Urraca Mesa, Prom Headquarters, is a smaller one.
seen
These southern plateaus are all capped by a flat basalt flow whieh overlies
thesofterC retaceous shales. The resistant sandstones the Raton Basin
'of
e plateau axe, I believe,g enerallyl acking on thes outh.

--- PAGE 4 ---
-2-
Thel ow easterly portion of Philmont Ranch lacks the mesa-form-
0
ing,r esistantl ayers, and is, .instead,u nderlain by the soft Cretaceous
Pierre shales, They are well e&osed in manyl ow hill slopes. hsevery-
where in the Rocky Mountain foothills, these strata slope at low angles
east northeast.
or
Where the Ptterre shales approach the axis of the Cimarron
Range, thghave been penetrated by many dikes of quartz-monzonite por-
phyry, and the presence of this very resistant has greatly influ-
rock
enced the scenery of the middle portion of the Ranch area. Some of the
dikes trend north-south, dip vertically, at high angles to the east.
or
They have given rise to several steep ridges. The longest is the one
that extends from north of Sawmill Canyon southward to the west end of
Tooth-of-Time Ridge. It is easily seen 'by the large gray cliffs i%fo rms
along its entire cowse.
e
Tooth-of-Time Ridge is underlain, along its axis, by a porphyry
dike that strikes east-west, is aboutm ilet hick, and extendsa long
the entire east-west length of ther idge. On the south flank, the PBdrre
shales dip at about 40" south. Whether they show up at the north base,
I do not know. Whether the Tooth-of-Time dike connectsw ith some of the
meridionally trending dikes, is also uncertain at present.
Neglecting the dikes, we should expect that from below the east-
ward-dippingC retaceous shales older and older strata should emerge as
we proceed'intot he mountains. Thist hey do. However, in this part of
the Front Range, there appears only a relatively thin sequence of red
shalys andstones and conglomerates( mostly, it seems, of late Carbonif-
erous age), before the crystalline rocks of the core of the range are
*
reached. And the combined effect of the purphyry dikes a d t he generally
soft nature of these redbeds is to conceal these old sedimentary rocks.
They are, however, fairly well exposed along the trail up Cimarroncito.
I
Creek, and are seen for a few hundred feet along Rapdo Creek. As the
~

--- PAGE 5 ---
-3-
Cretaceous beds, the older sedimentary rocks dip eastward, but more
a
steeply, 30-45".
The crystalline, pre-Carboniferousr ocks that underlie the core
of the Cimarron Range, consist of an oldest
system.of:northeast-trending
amphibolites, or hornblende schists, well layered, generally fine-
grainedr ocks,d ippingw ithi ntermediate or steep angles southeast. They
are intruded by thousands lenticular, conformablbe masses of a pink
of or
reddish granite, commonly so coarse-grained that the name, pegmatite, is
appropriate. Where lwge numbers these have enteredt hea mphibolite,t he
of
rocks display mixed characters, and the amphibolite is more feldspathic
thane lsewhere.C ross-cuttingd ikes of granite are, however, rare
and,
it seems, restrictedt os hort,t hind ikes and stringers. The most contin-
uous exposures of the pre-Carboniferous (very probably Precambrian rocks)
are along the trail from Abreu Base Camp to and beyondR ayado Camp (also
called Fi*Camp).
The attitudes of the crystalline and later rocks are consistent-
ly at Variance, and there must be a profound angular unconformity be-
tween both rockg roups. However, exposmes in the forested mountain
territory are relatively scarce, and at the moment there is no known expo-
sure of the unconformityn ear any trail. According to Smith and Ray (Geol.
8oc. her. Bull., vol. 54, who have done the only somewhat de-
1943),.
tailed geological work in this part the range, the core of the Cimar-
of
ron Range, including Bonito, Black, Bear, Clear CreeE, and Tolby Moun-
tain, is a solid mass crystalliner ocks. However, it is possible
of
that some of the highest and least accessible areas will reveal later
sedimentary and volcanic rocks resting on the crystalline basement.
e
Very generally, the history of the Cimarron Range is as follows:
Probably in Precambrian time, and certainly long before the Carbonifer-
period, a series of basaltic lava flows and tuff deposits
ous ash or
were piled up in a very thick series of layers. They were subsequently

--- PAGE 6 ---
~
-4-
tilted, but apparently not folded, were brought to levels of the crust
a several miles below the then surface, and it was here that the system
of layers was mineralogically altered to amphibolites, and penetrated
by veryl arge volumes of granitic rocks. Them ore gaseous fractions of
these crystallized as coarseq uartz-feldspar-micaa ggregates,t he so-
called pegmatites. Ordinarys edimentaryr ocks,s uch as sandstones,l ime-
stones, shales, must have been nearly absent in this series of rocks.
or
At least, their metamorphosed equivalents are conspicuouslyl acking.
In Carboniferous and time, this complex ofh etamorphosed
Permian
rocks has been a land mass, probably mountainous, and on both the west and
east sides large masses of coarse sandy debris accumulated. At least on the
west, there was a sea, and several thousand feet of sandstones and sandy
shales, with abundant marine fossils, are exposed on U.S. Highway 64,
between Taos and Eagle Nest. Interbeddedw itht hesem arine strata are
e
others that appear to be swamp deposits for they contain many well
preserved fossil plants, and some coal beds.
In Cretacous time, a sea advanced, and.in the thick series
of
Pierre shies preserved marine bivalves, cephalopods, as well
are many
as marined inosaurs. Then the sea gradually withdrew, and fresh-water
sandss ucceeded the shales. They form the high plateau rim rocks north of
the Philmont Randh, and are the economically important saxlistones of late
Cretaceous and Eocene age of the Raton coal Basin.
time after the deposition of the Eocene (early Tertiary)
Some
sediments, the region changed from one deposition to one up-lift
of of
and erssion. Exactly when this part of the Rocky Mountains has
exper-
ienced its greatest uplift, and whether this uplift occurred once
or
in several stages, is not quite certain at present.T here is reason to
e
believe that perhaps in Miocene time the quartz-monzonite porphyry dikes
were intruded. They do cutt heC retaceouss edimentaryr ocks, 60 they are
later than these. Perhapst hea ikes were intruded at aboutt het ime Of

--- PAGE 7 ---
-5-
of greatest uplift of ther ange. It is probable that some the dikes
of
@
have served as feeders of lavaf lows. A largef lat-wing Thow aph-
of
ahitic (dense) stony rhyolite crops out south Touch-me-not Mountain,
of
north of Cimarron Canyon, just oubsidet her ancha rea. But whether it is
connected with the great sill, or dike, that the Palisades the
forms of
Cimarron, not yet been investigated.
has
time after the extbusion these siliceous lavas, the
Some of
canyon-Gutting of the Cimron Range began. It has developed in se-
veral stages. At an early stage,p ossibleP liocene,t hee asterns lopes
seem to have been fairly smooth, connecting the high crest of the
range with the flat foothills of the Rocky Mountains.E videnceo f this
stage is found in the widespread boulder-strewn smooth slope remnants
preserved both north and south of Tooth-of-Time Ridge. The present
mir
valleys have cut profiles into, andb elow, these older slopes.
A good example is on the low mesa, about 1m ile west-northwest
of Head-
quarters.
The extensive basalt lava flows that cap Urraca,O rtega, &d
other mesas in the southern ranch area, were probably extruded after
thel arge, smooth slopes had been established. The basalt rests on
Cretaceous shales, and judging from cursory observations I inclined
am
to assume there is a slight unconformity at the base of thef lows. Whe-
ther the lava also rests on gravels that had been accumulated on the
high-levels lopes, I do not knowS. ome of the Basalt mesas lie hori-
zontal, others dip gently eastward, perhaps reflecting the general re-
gionals lope of theP liocenep eriod. Rayado and otherc reeksa ppear
to have cut their present canyons several hundred feet below the levels
e
of these basalt flows. There are no basalt flows that occupy canyens
valleys of the present time.
or
There no evidence that Ithis part Of the CiInarrOnR ange
is has

--- PAGE 11 ---
-2-
seen, Learn to observe them, and go abouty our work patiently, and when
yourt ime is up, you may have the greats atisfaction that what you have
seen,b egins to make sense; that you have begun to understand something
about the nature of the rocks around you; and that you have acquired a
feeling of what a geologist has to do in the field.
Mountains and valleys,p lains and canyons do not happen, They
are caused, like thunderstorms traffic accidents. It is for you to
or
discover some of these causes. Do not worry if you don% discover of
all
them. deals with big things, and we human beingsa re so small
Geology
in comparison that we are lucky if we succeed in comprehending hows ome
of the “biggest wheels” in the geological laboratory work. To do even
this weil, you have to keep your eyes open, your mind alert, and notebook
w.
and sharp pencil ready to record what you see, and what you
As you start your work, you learn that you can study very dif-
fermt things. Youm ay want to study the large valley that leads fmm
Headquarters straighti ntot he mountains( Cimarroncitov alley)’. you
Or
may wish to study she kinds of rock that underlie the slopes of this and
neighboringv alleys. You w i l l find much of interestt here.E ventually,
you will want to extend your investigation farther into the mountains,
to see ehether mountains and plains are underlain by the saae types of
rocks if they differ, what the relations are between the various
or,
rockf ormations. The plan of your geological work, while at Philmont,
is very elastic. It allows you to spend somewhat time on thosei tems
more
that, in you opinion, are particularly interesting, If you are wise,
however, you w i l l not want to leave this area without having some-
seen
thing of as many rocks, minerals, fossils, and outcrops as are character-
istic of this beautiful mountain land.

--- PAGE 16 ---
-7-
surrounding rocks haveb een tilted and deformed.at one the easternmost
of
exposures of the dark micaceous rock, you have mades ome very important obser-
0
vations,,provided you wrote them all down in your notebook in clear, readable.
form. If you want to do something extra, sit down in front of oneo f the most
interesting leeges, and sketch with your pencil what you see before you. Nobody
expects you to be aa artist, but if you want to be a geologist, you must learn
to draw, perhaps crudely, what your eyes have seen. It is astonishing howm uch
most of overlook if we nevers ketchr ocko utcrops in nature. When you finish
us
your sketch, mask in the upper left- and right-hand corners the appropriate
geographicd irections. If you look straight to the south, you have east ony our
left and west on your right. If you face northeast, you have northwest ony our
left, and southeast on yo& right, and .so forth.
If you are still around this ledge, have written down all your
observations, and perhaps made your first geological sketch, you deserve a
little reward, because to complete all this w i l l have taken you well over an
hour, and your feet may ache. You now want to know what these rocks meanh, ow
they got there, and what you can learn from them. Two hundred years nobody
ago,
would have told you anything about such hillsides, andy ou might have left them
utterly perplexeda boutt hec uriousn ature of rocks. Nowadays, you have at
your disposal the accumulated experience of many generations of geologists, made
easily accessible in textbooks and special reports. A few geologists
have walked over the hill you stand on, and the surrounding terrain.
Thanks to their studies, you can learn that the main rock on this hill
is a shale, was formed during the so-called Cretaceous period of the
earth’s history and, as you should verify, the layers of this shale do not
lie exactly horizontally, but slope as we ia geology, dip) gently
(or,
downward to the northeast. The dark, micaceous rock is a volcanic in
rock,
fact a very rare type as volcanicr ocks go. It has thes cientific name,
minette, and in addition to the dark mica, biotite, it contains a large
amount of potashf eldspar, traces of several other rarer minerals. If
and

--- PAGE 17 ---
you observed, as you haveb eena sked, what the shape of this rock is, you
0 will agree that it could be called a tabular rock body, perhaps 6 feet
wide, and exposed aboutf- e eit n a direction. You had
for
better fill out these two blanks pacesb efore you leave the hill. Estim-
ating distances is something all Scouts and Geologists must be able to do.
look up your Merit Badgeb ook to find a special name by which
Also, Geology
geologists refer to tabular volcanic igneous, in re5erence to the Latin
(or
word for fire, ignis) rocks that penethate the rock layers of the earth's crest.
Youn uw have quite a collection of questions you will want.to
read up on at home. Wha t is a shale? (2) Eow is it formed? (3)
(I) Is
the Cretaceous period relatively late or early when we consider the age of
theE arth? (4) Roughly, howm any years is theC retaceousp eriodb elieved
to have lasted? (6) Can you tell something aboutt he age of the minette?
you must think twice before you are ready with an answer here.
e
On one thing, yourb ookletd oesn ots upplyt hei nformation. It
does not tell' you why the Cretaceous shaie, as it approaches the minette,
turns into a dark, splintery rock.W ell, an &-page bookletc ann otp rovide
all the information you need in a particular area.. Experience has shown that
many non-igneous rocks have been altered in somew ay where .they have come in
contactw ithv olcanicr ocks.I n' chisp articular example, the effect happens
to be very similar to what we artificially when we make bricks. For brick-
do
making, you start out with clay (and as you will find in your booklet, clay
and shale have the same composition; the main difference is that shale has been
compressed to some extent), you shape the soft clay, and push the soft bricks
in rows into a brick-oven, where you heat them to temperatures of over
l,OOOo
Fahrenheit. The clays ubstance, exposed to this heat for many hours,will then
developc rystals, and most of them are hard.T herefore,t he fired brick is a
0
pretty hard rock. The Cretaceous shale has been baked into something like a
natural brick in contact with the minette. This particular rock, composed of
dark minerals, so small you can not identify them with the naked eye, -and com-

--- PAGE 18 ---
-9-
or
monly of a brownish, dark gray color, has been called, hornfels
(meaning "horn-like rock" in German). The term is used internatfioorn ally
so
this typeo f rock and a rock altered by igneous heat is called "contact;
"The
metamorphosed". You can say: hornfels is a contact-metamorphosed
shale",
Cretaceous or "The splintered rock ai sC retaceous hornfels".
You willh ave more questionsa s you leave this hill. You wonder,
of course, %hether this maosfs minette belonged tao former volcano. If
there was one, b i a t s disapperaed before our time. Perhaps there n ow as
volcano. You caxi not get the answer at this hill& But keep the question
alive in your mind. Somewhere else, at some other opporatnu naintsyw,e r
may present itself. You probaballys o are wondering why the hillside is
so
strewn with many large boulders of rocks unlike the Cretaceous shale. Again,
see, be
the answer is not at haYndo.u -can therefore, whyy ou should patient
in geology. If every hill ugsa vteh e answer to aolulr questions,
geology would, indeed, baen easy science. But don't despair. We
will come across more boulders elsewhere.

--- PAGE 19 ---
TRIP TO CIMARRONCITO CAMP, AND WESTWARD AND MINES
TOWARDS LAMBERT CYPBER1S

--- PAGE 20 ---
n
Trip to Cimarroncito Camp, and Westward towards Lambert and Dypherts Mines
On your exploration at the 1 mile west of Headquarters
hill,
you became acquainted with the brownish-gray Cretaceous shale that
flakes easily into little softc hips. Today,y ou w i l l proceed farther
into the mountains to the west. You w i l l drive along the Same road
and, as you pass the ledges, they should look familiar to you, and you
should have no GTifficulty recognizing the minette outcrops near the
west endo f the hill.
Westward, for about 5 miles, the follows the broad,
road
flat-bottomed valley of Cimarroncito Creek and does not pass many con-
spicuousr ocko utcrops. While drivingt hrought hisa rea,c ontinuet o
make observations. Remember, you are spendingo nly a few days or weeks
in this campY. ou have very much to observe and record if you want to
leave with a reasonably complete idea. of the geology. From the car,
you can see smooth, grassy slopes, of the same grayish colors as the
hill with the minette ledges, to the north and south of ther oad. Some-
timest hey are fairly close, sometimes over a mile away. A l l of these
featureless slopes, if youhad the time to walk over them,w ould prove to
be underlain by the same flaky brown grayish shales. As you wonst
or
have the time to map every square mile of the Ranch during your stay, you
may as well be told that the underlie most of the foothills leading
shales
to the forested slopes farther west. Shales of theC retaceousp eriod
are, in fact, one of the most widespread types of rock anywhere between'
Mexico and Alberta. This particular shale formation was first described
in South Dakota, about 90 years ago. In reference to a localityt here,
it is called the Pierre shale. You w i l l find. this name printed on your
Ranch map (in pocket your brown Program Hand Book). Then ame stands
of

--- PAGE 21 ---
-2-
for a large area underlain by the Pierre shale. Twenty years from now,
we probably have a much better map in which the exact limits of
shall
this formation have been drawn. But when it comes to geological exploration,
New Mexico is still pioneer country, and our knowledge of the distribution
of thev ariousf ormations is notv erya ccurate. of your future
Some
observations, if they are reliable, will help extend our knowledge.
us
From these remarks, it should be clear to you as you look
across the valley to the south, that the steep crags that make up Tooth-
-
Of-Time Ridge, are probably of a different rock, one that seems to
resist weatheringp rocesses much better than the soft Pierre A
shale.
geologist, travelling in new terrain, shoulda lwaysk eep his eyes open for
suchd ifferences in relief forms. thec ontrast is extreme, In other
Here
areas, thed ifference is more subtle,y etr ecognizable. Many a productive
oil and gas field been discovered by geologists who Eept their
has @ ~ p
open to the meaning of these slight contrasts in t w i n and relief features.
Where the road passes close to Webster Lake, you see shale
exposures near the and on your right (north), forward, you can see
road,
the large flat-topped hill, called LakeM esa.M esa is the Spanish
Deer
word for table. You can see wby the word is appropriate.N early all
mesas owe their flat top to a particular kind of rock. In the Rocky
Mountain region, there are scores of mesas, small ones and large ones.
The largest ones you can call plateaus. Perhaps you have heard, read,
or
something how pilateaus &e formed. It has something to do with a
on
flat, resistant plate of rock, and erosion. Keep this in mind. Some
time later you w i l l have a chance of studying this matter in more &Tail.
you proceed, the surface rises, and the becomes rough;
As road
finally, you pass a large, tall gray cliff to the north. In front of it
is a beautiful reservoir with drinking water the town of Cimwron.
for
At this cliff, you have left behind the gently rolling hills and plains
of the Rocky Mountain foothills, and you are now in very different terrain,

--- PAGE 22 ---
-3-
mountainous, forested, more complicated,b ut more interesting. Soon
0 you leavet hec ar at theC imarroncito Base Camp. Gather up yourn otebook,
hammer, magnifying lens, see to it that your pencil is sharp, and that
you have a knife to sharpen it time to time.
from
We follow the trail that leads westward from Cimarroncito Base
Camp along Midale Fork of Cimarroncito Creek.
Directly as you start out, you will notice yellowish-gray
gravel on the trail. Don't stop now, but remember it. Thirty feet
beyong the barbed wire gate, on your right (north), there is an out-
crop rock.S top, and examine it, and be sure you write down what
of
you see. You should know this rock as an old friend now. If you ex-
amined ther ocks at the hill, lmile west Headquarters, you should
' of
know very soon that this outcrop,e vent hough it is small, is the same
Cretaceous Pierre shale.
0
This is a very important discovery, and it should puzzle you.
So far, you.have learned to associate the dark Pierre shales with flat,
open country. Now you have passed across high, steep cliffs, and yet
here you findt he same soft shale. Thisd oesn ot make sense.O bviously,
the steep cliffs must be composed a different rock, resistant to weather-
of
ing. soft shale cann otg ive rise to vertical crags. you had to
The As
stay in the car until you arrived at th.e Cimarroncito Base Camp, you could
not examine the rock in the k g e cliff north the reservoir. Fortun-
of
ately, you can makeu p for this. Walk on 100 feet, and just as you come
to the creek, you find on your north side a ledge. Take outy our hammer,
and go to worko n this rock. It is worth it. The ledge is notl arge,
and the blocks axe hard to get'off, but you must get hold of a reasonably
large piece, and then obtain a fresh surface. If you get one, you will
0 '2
at once see why this is important. The ordinaryw eathereds urfaces
of
most rocks look quite different from the fre& rock inside. yo recog-

--- PAGE 24 ---
-5-
green.S ee that you find a few good ones. If YOU 6.0, you will notice that
some have the shapeo f shorts ticks, needles, whereas others are like
or
flat plates. If you are lucky,y ou'lls ee that some them have a shape
of
like a hexagon. With your knife, try to pry some of these dask grains off the
rock. you will find that the slender dark needles do not come off easily,
but some .of' the flat, shiny grains do. If they are large enough, try your
magnifying glass ont hem. You will then recognize a mineral familiar from
the trip to the minette ledges. The flexible sheets are biotite mica, the
same as in them inette. The otherd ark mineral, in slender prisms
and
needles,l ackst hep erfectc leavage of the biotite. As you can not tell
muchm ore about it without a microscope, you may as well know that this
mineral is calledh ornblende, amphibole. 'This is, in fact, the name
or
of a large group of minemls. They have a wide distribution in the earthts
crust. Your kind of hornblende is dark on account of iron oxide, which is
combined 'in the mineral with silica, alumina,l ime, magnesia, and some
manganese oxide. Amphibole entir&y free from iron oxide 5s colorless.
You find it in certain marbles. But most amphiboles areg reenish, even
black.
There is still anotherm ineral in your rock.I $,too, forms
large grains. If theyb rokeo ut whole, theyl ook like gxay pinkish
or
pebbles. If you broke them through,t heya rec olorless inside, like
glass. Thism ineral is quartz,p robablyt he most abundantm ineral in .
the crust of the earth. You can easily identify quartz; it lacksc leayage,
and it will scratch your steel knife. Few other minerals are so hard.
Quartz is like glass in that it no color of its own. But if a minute
has
amounto f a mineral pigment is present in quartz crystals, it win at Once
Color the quartz, -yellow, red,b lack, brown, nearlye veryc olor been
has
found. Remember, therefore,t hatt hec olor quartz is notd iagnostic,
of
nor its accidental shage; but is hardness, glass-like greasy luster, and
lack of cleavage are good criteria in determining the mineral.

--- PAGE 25 ---
-6-
the quartz grains in this rock should look like pebbles is
Why
unknown. It is an uncommon feature as is the opaque, whitish shell of
e
the grains. You w i l l find that the amount of quarte in this rock varies
from one ledge to another. The last portion of the rock you must note,
is the veryf ine-grained groundmass, of dark grayc olor. I have nots een
it under the microscope, and do not know what minerals it may contain.
Perhaps in another year, the rock will have been examined microscopically.
Even so, you can see that this rock is totally different from
the Pierre shale. It consists of a great many crystal grains (the words,
crystal, and mineral,c ould be used interchangeably; some persons prefer
the first word if the grain is terminated by straight faces. Don'tw orry
abouto therc onnotations of these words). They are, 'however, of sufficient
2
size for you to recognize them. And between them is a groundmass,
or
matrix, of microscopically small grains.
Thet wo ledges of this rock do not allow you to estimate the
shape ther ock. But you see that it builds up tall cliffs around
of
you. It extends generally across the valley of Middle ForkC imarroncito
Creek, and you do nots ee any layering. Two hundred years a.go, a very
famous leader in geoh3gyw ould pronounced this rock an ocean de-
have
posit, like sand or mud. He did not know that crystals off eldspar,
amphibole, and biotite require temperatures of about l,OOOo Fahrenheit
to form; and it has been established that many volcanic rocks which congeal
before our eyes from molten lava, carry such crystal grains in suspension.
The frozen rock displays thousands of nicely formed crystals in a fine-
grained groundmass. Our rock, ins hort, is anotherv olcanic, igneous
or
rock. Quited ifferent in appearance from them inette. Again, there is
xolcano overhead, and again you can not tell where at the surface of
no
the earth thisl avae rupted. The rock is completelyc old now, and you
wonder how long ago this lava flowedt hrought her ocks. Nature rarely
answers m y q uestions in one place.T herea re more rocko utcrops to come,

--- PAGE 26 ---
-7-
so keep ane ye on those problems for which,you lack answer. However,
an
you do not yet knowh ow to.examine rock microscopically and deterrbine
as a
the scientific names of igneous rocks, you mayk now that this rock is in
composition somewhat similar to granite. It is called a "quartz-monzonite
porphyry". Thew ord, porphyry, means that ther ock is composed of large,
well formed crystal grains embedded in a much finer-grained groundmass.
Thew ord, monzonite, refers to Monzoni, a village in the Italian Alps,
where such a rock was first described by geologists. If you go on with
Geology in later years, come to a good library, and can boast of a. smat-
tering of you may enjoy the first chapter in Waldemar Christian
German,
Broegger's "Die Eruptivgesteine des Dristianiagebietes, Vol. Die Erup-
2:
I1
tionsfolge der triadischen Eruptivgesteine bei Predazzo in Sudtirol",
Videnskabs-Selskabets Skrifter, I. Mathematisk-maturv. Klasse, No. 7,
1895. It is classic, like Darwints "Origin of Species", or G. K. Gil-
a
bert's "Geology of the Henry Mountains, Utah". In thisc hapter,t he Eor-
Fiegian geologist,Broegger, looks through the 'guest booko f the Hotel
"The Golden Ship", at Predazzo,n ear Monzoni, and recalls the achievements
..
of the scores of famous geologists who registered there while making
geological observations on the huge cliff walls near Monzoni.T hey were
concerned with problems that are still among the most fundamental in
physical geology. But you need not waste time with this now; instead,
you had better continue your observations.
One thing you have not been able to discover at the last out-
crops:t hes hape of thei gneousr ock. If you had ample time, you might
climb up on the cliffs to the north and south of the ravine, and per-
haps you could see the general shape of the monzonitep orphyry. But
the pines grow so thickly that you can not see enough from the bottom of
ther avine. Be patienta gain, and remember that you want to findo ut what
the shape of the igneous rock is when the opportunity comes.
The cliff of monzonite porphyry soon withdraws from the trail,

--- PAGE 27 ---
-8-
and you see no rocks for about 1,000 feet. This gives you a chance to
a look at some of the boulders that lie by the trail. They are and of
loose,
various kinds. Break a few with a to obtain fresh surfaces, and
hammer,
comparet hem with rocks you already knowM. ake a note in yourn otebook
what kinds of rock you think you recognize. If you see others, examine
them also, write down what you can see, and again be patient. If the
boulders lie around in the bottom of this ravine, quite probably there
w i l l be ledges of them where you can examine them at your leisure. And
should you be unable to follow this particular valley far enough to come
to them, there is a chanceo f finding them in some other trail.
As you pass through the next few hundred feet, you may obserqe
the bottom of the small creek. It is covered in most places with boulders.
should this be so? You will see so many while you are at Philmont, and
Why
they are discussed in your Merit Badge booklet that you do not need any
speciain l formation on this.
About 1,tiOO feet after you passed the last monzonite outcrop, you
have low ledges on the south side of the trail. Byn ow you are an old hand
a.t examining rocks. So take off your pack, get out the hammer, break a few
characteristicb lockst hrough, and examine them. Then, as nsual,w rite down
whatever you observe. Now you should be so experienced that youd o not need
any further explanation. The minerals in this rock you have seen before.
Perhaps the grains are of different size or color from those in another rock;
but that is common.
Next try to aecide khether this rock is composed of layers, like
theP ierres hale, or structureless, like the porphyry. It doesn ot make very
much difference what you may decide in this particular outcrop. As always,
the main thing is that you try to observe the rock as carefully as you can,
record what you see.
and
About 60 feet farther up the trail, you pass more ledges.R epeat
your observations, and write down what you fina. Climb up on the ledge
lar&

--- PAGE 28 ---
-9-
directly north the creek, and examine it. Don’t hurry. Spend plenty
of
time on the rocks. When you comed own from that ledge, you should have
of
e
settled the matter layered VS. structureless,u nlayered,r ock. You
of
should have seen the coarse, and fine-grained beds, and you should have a
pretty good idea what kind rocks make up most that cliff.
of of of If
in doubt, consult the chart on page 32 of your Merit Badge Booklet.
. .
Did you observe and record in your book whether the layers
also
lie horizontal or, if Fihey are tilted, in which general geographic direction
theya red ipping, and at about what degree inclination? Be sure you
of
write down a few words. Later, you w i l l need that information.
this ledge, the North Fork Cimarroncito Creek joins our
West of of
MiddleF ork, and a trail follows the North Fork to an abandoned mine.
We
stay on the main trail, because from now on we shall have much to observe
and record. Directly west the mouth NorthF ork starts a hillside
of of
on then orth bank MiddieF ork. Examine the many outcrops of rock on it,.
of
and record the usual things, colors the rocks, types of layers, attitude
of
o f the layers, composition as 8itLa as you cano bserve it.
If timep ermits,c limb up a short distahce on this slope, and look
around. Byn ow, you have seen a strip country,n early 6 miles in an east-
of
westerly direction1 You are already among fairly high mountains,a nd you
have been patient enough to make careful observations from one outcrop to
another.G radually, some rewards for that patience will come in. You want
to know, every geologist does, why the mountains are there; why they are
as
high; and by what kind a mechanism such hage of rock are built
so of masses
up into a chain mountains. out a clean sheet of paper, a page
of Take or
in yourn otebook. Draw a thin pencil line sloping gently from the left
down to the right, and write a W just above the left end, and an E at
threi g ht one.

--- PAGE 29 ---
-10-
Thus:
w
This line may represent roughly the earth's surface, a.s it. slopes from
where you stand eastward to the hillside with the minette and Pierre
shales. Look up in your notes in which direction the shales dip at the
minette hill, and at about howm any degrees. Now draw a.few lines below
the "skyline", on the eastern portion of your diagram, to represent the
dipping Pierre shales, thus:
d
They dip northeast, at about 5-8", so the lines should be inclined to
the right in your diagram. The exact angle of the dip is important at
not
this moment, but keep it gentle. In the middle of the diagram, you can not
draw apything because that is the 5-mile stretch wherey ou drove through,
l
and did not stop to examine any outcrops.B ut you remember that from the
distance you saw Pierre shale ledges there, and, as started out on this
yau
trail, you passed that outcrop Pierre shale, 100 feet west of Cimwroncito
of
Base CampL. ook up in your notes at about howm any degrees the shaLe beds in
that outcrop dip, and in what general direction. Don't tell me you forgot
to observe and recordt hat! that serious omission, you should be
For
required to walk right back to that ledge, and complete your notes.
But fortunately, axe as yet beginner, and it takes time before
you a
you remember everythingi n a new occupation. So, just this one time, the
missing facts and figures w i l l be supplied: The dark brwish-gray shale,
100 feet west from the Camp, dips at about 36 degrees downward to the

--- PAGE 30 ---
-11-
northeast. Better stop there when you return from this trip, and make
a sure that this is correct.
About 113 inch from the left in om diagram, we draw lines
sloping down to the right at about 35 degrees. thet imeib&ing, let
For
omit the porphyzy in o w traverse, and now, at the left (western) end
us
.of our diagram, we draw the variegated shales and sandstones that are
before also with their average dip angles, thus:
us,
w
Now you can see something very interesting: The layers of
Pierre shale and sandsbone dip steeper to the northeast as you follow them
from east to west. In your Merit Badgeb ook, you have read that nearly
all layered rocks:.are depositedo riginallyi nh orizontal nearlyh ori-
or
zontalbeds. Our strata arei nclined.T hat means, they must have been
tipped up in such a way that the western ends of the beds were raised,
thee astern onesl owered. It shouldb e clear,a lso,t hatt he strata
or
in front ofy ou underlie the ones fa&ther east. So, if youw ant to obtain
a specimen of the yellow,g reen, gray sandstone beds before you( shown
or
with dots in diagram) at the minette hill, 6 miles east, you'd have to
drill, and some hundreds thousands of feet below the surface you are
or
likely to into them, thus:
run
you stretch out your right hand,p alm flat, finger tips pointing to the
left. Now raise your left fist slowly yrom underneath your right fingers.

--- PAGE 31 ---
-12-
The fingers are forced to bend, and your palm will be tipped up steeper
e
and steeper the farther you raise your left fist. If that picture
resembles what happened to the rocks here, you can make a few guesses:
has
As you continue west, and pass more layered rocks, in what general directions
wouldy ou expect the layers to dip? Generally speaking, do expect the
you
layers farther west to dip more gently, steeper?
or
Our guesses and experimenta re, of course,n otq uitea dequate.
.
one thing, we have left outt hep orpwry But at the moment, it looks
For
as if the high mountains west of you have been pushed up from under-
neath, somewhat like your fist undery our flat palm. Now let's continue
our trail.
on
Nearly continous, low outcrops along the trail for the next
300 geet display a variety of purplish sandstone, shale, a.nd siltstone
beds, with a few veryf ine-grainedc alcareousl enses. Be sure you stop
e
at the ledge just where the trail crosses over to the south side of the
creek. What you seeh ere is most interesting and important for this
entire trip. You see layer upon layerd ipping in the familiar north-
easterly direction. But at the last 7 feet so, an entirely different
or
rock appears; however, as you break fresh surfaces from this ledge, you will
recognize it at once as the rock you saw g mile ba'c-k: "quartz-monzonite
porphyry".T here is no doubta bout it. Thes ame whitish feldspar crystals,
biotite, and hornblenden eedles,a gain someo f the peculiar pebblelike
quartzes, and a dark gray groundmass.
Now be sure you examine the surface there the two different
rocks meet. It is spoken of as thec ontact. If you make your observa-
tions with caie, as you should, you'll notice that both the porphyry
e and the shaly layers change as theya pproache acho ther. The changes
in the shale should at once recall which other outcrop? What did you
notet here? Did you find aboutt he sme thing here? If you do, how

--- PAGE 32 ---
-13-
wouldy ou interpret the change in the shaly rocks? If you look up
your notes from that other trip, all the details will come back,a nd
0
you have the satisfaction that at two entirely separate places you can
check the same important change in a rock. Very probably,t hen, the cause
was also the same in both pla.ces. So far, you had to talre my word for
it that the monzonite porphyry was an igneous rock that was once very hot.
Now you have before you confirminge vidence. The shale had to be heated
nearly a thousand degrees Before it turned into the gray, dense hornfels.
So this does make some sense, event hough all the rocks are now cold.
If you continue geological studies, you will find, over and over, htaA
your job is to reconstruct processes, movements, causes and effects, and
sequences of events. It is this reconstruction that permits you to bring
the earth's crust truly to life, andy ou can depict stage after stags
in the evolution of a mountain range, a former volcano, or even a continent.
As you examine the contact surface between the quartz-monzon-
ite porphyry and the baked shale, you notice two things: the surface runs
parallel to the beds of shale, and within some 5 inches from the contact,'
the feldspar phenocrysts become smaller and smaller, and the dark gray
goundmass increases in volume correspondingly.T his is a fairly com-
mon behavioro fi gneousr ocks. It is explained by saying that the
molten lava that came first in contact with the cold rock, lacked the
large feldspar crystals, that only small onesc ould be squeezed into
or
an originally thin crack in the shale, and froze onto its wall.
After crossing the creek, you can walk for about, 250 feet
across monzonite. Then,o n thes outh side of the trail, comes another
important outcrop which you should examine just as carefully as the
last one. You will see that it is aboutt he" mirror image" of the last
0
ledge.I nt he first, thes halel ay on top of'the monzonite, now the
monzonite lies on top of thes hale. The shale is againc ontact-meta-
morphosed (or "hornfelsed") at the contact, a.nd if you will examine,

--- PAGE 33 ---
-14-
as you were asked, the entire ledge, you will find, as a special, local
contactm ineral,s carlet-redj asper.T his is quartz,s tainedr ed by
irono xides. Don't demolish the entire cliff on its account. Next
year, too, some Scouts will want to collect a little bit of it.
Before you leave the ledge, take out your paper and pencil,
and try to extendy ourc ross-sectiond iagram to the westward. So far,
it shows the Cretaceous Pierre shales at the minette hill dipping gently
eastward; the 5-mile gap in observations; the steeper dips where the
sandstone ledges are, near the moutho f North Fork Cimarroncito Creek;
and the imaginary drill hole at the minette hill. Now draw the sky-
line farther to the west. If you have no room, start a new diagram
o f which the right (eastern) part coincidesw itht he left (western)
part of your first diagram. Draw all thep urplish,g ray, and yellows ands-
tones and shales that dip northeastwmd between the moutho f North Fork
and thel edge where the shale rests on the monzonite. Now, if you can
estimate dip angles fairly well, you will find that in both outcrops the
contact between the shale and the monzonite almost exactly the same
has
dip angle, to wit, 37-40', down to the northeast. As you see it at the
jasper ledge, the contact is parallel to the shale or hornfels beds.
In your section, therefme, you can draw two lines having the same dip
as that of the shales, and the rock between them w i l l be monzonite
porphyry, not shale. It should be clear to you that the porphyry has the
shapeo f a layer, or plate, dipping at the same angle and in the
same
direction, as thes urroundings hales and sandstones.T here is a name for
an igneous mass that has the shapeo f a plate parallel to the bedding
planes of layered rocks. You'll find it in yourM erit Badge book.
Estimate the thickness of this plate of quartz-monzonite porphyry, and
add that figure on yourd iagram. Be sure not to confuse the distance
between the two contacts, as you walk it on level ground, with the distance
of an imaginary line at right angles to the upper and lower contact planes.

--- PAGE 34 ---
-15-
Byn ow, you should realize that in your section a great many
a masses of quartz-monzonitep orphyry are involved. First, you saw the
large cliff north of the reservoir, just east of the base camp. This
cliff, you may as well know, was porphyry. Then you passed that mass,
about 100 feet after starting on the trail. But the contacts with the
layereds hales were concealed. Now you have passed a large sheet-like
mass, that dips northeast, as if it were a layer of a sedimentary rock.
Byn ow, also, you will realize that the many tall, gray cliffs that
surround the creek the north and south sides, are apparently all
on
composed of porphyry. If we could remove a l l the porphyry, leavingo nly
the soft shales, the entire scenery around would in all probability
us
be muchm ore subdued, resembling the rolling foothills farther east.
You can see now that if one of two adjoining regions is composed of a
resistant rock, the other of a less resistant rock, it stands to reason
e
that the first region will have a highers urface, in general,t hant he
other.T his is ani mportantp rinciple in geolom. You will find it
discussed in yourM erit Badgeb ook. As all principles, this has exceptions.
Perhaps this paragraphc auses you some confusion2 A while
back, you drew a cross-section, showing the Cretaceous shales dipping
steeper on the west; and with your hands you made a simple experiment
showing that it looked as though the high mountains to the west of you
had been pushed up. That seemed perhaps a plausible explanation ohf ow
mountains were made. Now comes quitea notherp rinciplei nto this story,
the resistance of different rocks. If you have resistant rocks on the
west, and soft rocks on the east, then too, you might expect hi& mow-
tains on the west side.
A l l this need notc onfuse you. Rather, it should make you
0
aware that Geology is a complicateds cience.L ike a machine that con-
sists of many parts, each of which a c,ertain effect on the workings
has
of the whole mechanism. You must study all parts before you can
sm

--- PAGE 35 ---
-16-
that you understand the entire machine. We know that all kinds of
*
factors have eniered into the formation of the Rocky Mountains. You will
meet manym ore as we go along. The creek and trail make a curve,w est
of theJ asperl edge. The shale is again interrupted by monzonite por-
phyry of which you pass some tattered ledges on your right. They have
more quartzt hant he monzonite outcropse ast. About 150 feet farther
northwest,g ray,s andstonec ropso ut. It dips againn ortheast,h ut
thec ontact with theq uartz-monzonitep orphyry is concealed. The igneous
rockc ould be anothers heet, or it mighth avea ny other shape. You can
not tell. The sandstone is againi nterrupted by porphyry, some 100
eeet west. It is apparently a small only,b ecause soon you see
mass
again tan, or pale brown shale, and then come several.ledges of a purple
sandy Shale, dipping at about 35” northeast. On some beddingp lanes,
you can see little sparkling blebs. They are white mica, or muscovite.
@ It differs from the brown or green biotite in that it lackst hei ron
oxide, and therefore has no color.
you will note in these outcrops that not all the layers are
parallel to eacho ther. Some groups of beds are beveled by others, thus:
This is called“ cross-bedding”. You can find it where sand been
has
blown about by the wind, and heaped up in dunes. You also find it where
swiftly flowing water carries much sand, silt, or gravel, and has to
force its way around obstacles. It will then push the sediment in many
small channels which may cross each other as time goes on, and the
e sand
degpsrGted yesterday in one channel, may today be worna wayb y another
channel.N early all cross-beddeds ediment was depesitedi ns hallow
fiadd plains by river water, or blown together by wind. SO we learn here

--- PAGE 36 ---
-17-
something about the mode of origin of this rock.
At the base of these cross-bedded layers, you find others
thata re composedo f fairly well-roundedp ebbles, some nearlyi nch
across. In yourM erit Badgeb ook, you will find a reference to such
rocks. If the cross-beddeds andstone was formed in either flood plains
or through accumulation of sand inddunes, you can reach a conclusion
as to which of these alternatives is the more probable one for this
particular group of beds.
some 150 feet the trail passes purple shale in small
For
outcrops on the right side. Just after you pass a curve in the trail,'
the shale suddenly interrupted for some 12 feet by a different rock.
is
You are now so experienced in recognizing the Philmont rocks that it takes
you just one minute, after breaking fresh block of this rock, to recognize
a
it as another of quartz monzonitep orphyry. And you need no reminder
e mass
that youm ust not walk on before you have tried to determine the shapeo f
this relatively small mass ofp orphyry. This is mades omewhat easyb ecause
fromthe trail you can see the porphyry extending upward along the hillside.
If youh ave a. compass, you can determine the direction in which it
runs.
If not, use the position of the sun to estimate the general geographic
direction1 Would you sayt her ock has the shape of a plate? If so, is
it horizontal,v ertical, or inclined? If it is inclined,a g eologist
must determine in whicho f the two possible directions the plate dips. To
do that, youm ust ofc oursel ook for the contact plane. Put your eyes
..
and mind to it, and you will find the answer. Bny o w you w i l l also know
whether this mass should be called a dike, or a. sill.
You are now faniliar with mosto f the rocks you w i l l encounter
on this tra.il. As you continue, you passs everal more masses of quartz-
monzonitep orphyry, and should make ane ffortt o determine the most
probable shapeo f each mass. If you were ppfd to map the geology of
this ravine, you would have to climb up the walls every time you pass a

--- PAGE 37 ---
-18-
porphyry mass, to determine and measure its exact orienta.tion. Not all the
contacts are exposed, and it's quite a. job to determine the shape of the
concealed contacts. But for the sake of accurate and reliable mapping
this must be done.
Between the monzonite porphyries, you passa gain many out-
crops of reddish, purple, or buffs andstone.A ssociated with them
ase layers ofc onglomerate. A good one is on the northwest side of the
trail, about 100 feet above the "Stone Fa.ce" masker. Measure, estimate,
or
the diameters of the largest pebbles in this rock. Take a good look at
8he rocks.of these pebbles. Do theyl ookf amiliart o you? Whether they
do not, a conglomera.te w i l l always interest you if you study Geology.
or
We go into picture galleries and museums, may openb ooks with pictures
or
showing what clothes people wore, hundreds even thousands of years ago.
or
On the Greek temple friezes, we can see scenes showing people talking Br
arguing; we can see what gadgets they used for weighingm erchandise, what
pencils for writing on papyri, what buckles they woreo n their sandals.
Now a conglomerate is something just 8,s precious. It is something like
a photogcaph of a busy railroad station, many millions of years ago.
Our tna.ins are, of course, the streaming wa.ter particles in a. former creek,
and the passengers are the thousands of rock pebbles that have all been
urged pushed about, and finally dropped by the water train. Where did
on,
they come from, how far did they travel before they were deposit&? If you
are waiting for a friend a.t a rail station, you can give an exact
road
anmer only for your friend, because you know where hec omes from,
and how far he traveled. For the otherp assengers,u nlesst hey wear a
turban a kilt, youw ould not know tha.t. It is very much the same when
or
a you study the pebbles in a. con.@lomerate. If youk now that there is a, ledge
at such-and-such a place of this that rock which lies before you as a
or
pebble boulder, then you can assume that some time ago the stream that
or
collected a l l these pebbles,p icked up someo f them at the vicinity'

--- PAGE 38 ---
-19-
of the place you know. But if youh ave nevers een a fock, you cann ot tell
where that ancient stream acquired this material.
Right now, you are not yet familiar with all the rock formations
of the Philmont Ranch. But in another week or so, you w i l l be. Just now,
if you are energetic, examine some of these pebbles carefully, and write
down at least a few Brief notes on the color, grain size, and other striking
characteristics of some of the pebbles. SEiould you later find outcrops
of rocks tha,t resemble the ones you see before you in pebbles, you can
still get an answer to your question.
This little search among the pebbles will make you realize
that much of a geologist's activity is similar to that of a detective
who constantly is on the lookout for clues and hints that may lead to the
apprehensiono ft hef elon. Our geologicalf elonsa re many: Right now,
we want to know where that formers treamg ot its pebbles.B efore, we wanted
0
to find out where tat. molten lava was going that made the many porphyry
dikes, or that minette lava that passed through the hill lmile west of
headquarters. Is it hiding 8 volcano from us? If there was one, did it
have a grand plan up its sleeve, perhaps, to push the Cimarron Range
up into the cold of theh ighera tmosphere?L ike a detective, you
good
don't jump at conclusions, but wait till all the clues converge toward a
story that canb ec hecked. In any case, you already have quite a few
. .
reliable and interesting clues, after less than 2 days in the field. This
is rapid progress. There are regions where a geologist may qpend days, weeks,
or even months without getting anywhere. In the hGid tropics, for example,
hills and valleys may bec overed by deep soil, so continuous that you can
nevers ee a fresh outcrop ofr ock. A few years ago, a geological party,
a working along the coastal plain of northern Alaska, paw exa.ctly one rock
outcrop during an entire field season!
If you continue on this trail, you pass another masso f
porphyry some 300 feet west.N oticet hel arger amounto f. grayf ine-grained

--- PAGE 39 ---
-20-
groundmass in it, and the small amounto f quartz. You w i l l probably find
several specimens in which the darkh ornblende crystals are a bright
green. The green minera.1 is callede pidote.( Transla.ted from Greek, the
wordm eans, "given in addition to", and goesb ack to an incident, about
150 years ago, when the famous French mineralogist and prelate, Hauy,
experienced great difficulty in determining the particular crystal system
of this minera.1. specimens hado ne crystals urfacet ha.td estroyed the
All
mineral'ss uspected symmetry.T he problem was finally solved,b ut the
ammoying plane was remembered when the mineral was named.T he crystals you
see, are so however, that you are not likely to recognize crystal
small,
surfaces.)E pidoteh asa boutt he sme chemicalc ompositiono fh orn-
blende, and under certain physical conditions, the molecules of hornblende
will change over into those of epidote.
Fromn ow on, muchm ore monzonite porphyry is in evidence.
0
Soon, a largec liff of this rock forms then orth w a l l of the canyona, nd
the coarse debris sandf rom its ledges strews the slope to such an extent
that you can not see any other rocks that be buried undernea.th. Never-
may
theless, if all the debris called talus @ geology)c ould be removed,
(Also
you would probably find the same reddish and purple sandstones andc onglom-
erates that you saw farther east.
In your diagram, you mayn ow add another section, extending as
fas west as youw ent; if your observations on the contacts of the various
porphyry masses are correct, you can add these as lines having the appropriate
directions of dip. Some, as you recal1,dip to the northeast,l ike the
sedimentaryr ocks.O thersd ipa cross the layers. So it as though
looks
the porphyry has broken acrostsh esbe e disn some places, and squeezed in
~
~
between the layers in other places. Volcanicr ocks in many parts of the
I world do that. If you continue to the Lambert or Cypher's Miney, ou see
practically nothing but porphyry varieties, of which have muchm ore
some
quartz, and the feldspar crystals do not show the cleavage well, but look
I chalky. We will discuss the rocks at the mines on another page.

--- PAGE 41 ---
-1-
To reach Abreu Camp, you drive west from Carson Maxwell Ranch.
*
Again, you start in the eastern foothill belt, and are deep in the mountains,
wherey ou reach Abreu Camp. As you drive west, you find the skyline flat
the north and south,t houghn ot everywhere horizontal. From an earlier
on
trip, you know what these flat-topped mountains are called in this part of
the United States. But you don't know what kind of rock crops out at the
top. Whatever it is, it must be verye xtensive. Keep your eyes also for-
ward tot hel eft( southwest). There, individual mountains practically
disappear one largep lateau.I ncidentally,t hen orthern edge of this
in
large plateau coincides with the southern boundary of Philmont Ranch.
Below the plateau cap rock, north and south of lower Rayado Creek va.lley,
you have smooth, relatively featureless slopes. You can suspectt he familiar
Just r ock: space . thfe il l out
Before you leave,l ooka round Abreu BBseeC@@y On the north,
e
across the gorge of Rayado Creek, is a magnificent cross-section of a
part of the same formation that accompanied you since you drove over from
RanCcahr:s on Maxwell south Directly
of the Camp, the pines are fairly thick, but you can pick up large boulders
on thes lope. Take a good look at them. Break off, as a fresh
asual,
surface, and examine it. To make sure you examine the right rock, look for
those that have many vesicles and cavities, are of rather dark gray, some-
times purplish color, and are pretty at the blow of the hammer. Fresh
hard
surfaces show, apart from the many little holes, a uniformly fine-grained
rock that does not tell you very much of its composition and texture, except
that it is notl ayered. Every now and then, however, a surface sunlight
in
w i l l show a few weakly reflecting: grains. As you cann otd etermine
small,
the rock on the basis of so few criteria, you may be told that this rock
is basalt. Next tob ranite,l imestone and sandstone, it is about the most
abundantr ock in the earth's crust.T his pa.rticug& basalt is fine-grained,

--- PAGE 42 ---
-2-
and you need a,microscope to identify the individual minerals. If youh ad
one, you couldr ecognizet hem ineralsf eldspar and pyroxene (translated from
Greek, pyroxene means "friend ofF ire", in reference to its growthf rom
molten1 a.m.).R arely do they form phenocrysts,a bout inchl ong.
1/8
Keep in mind, then, that the large mesa, southwest of you, and
always on the south bank of Rayado Creek, is a. large flat plate of Bksalt,
a true lava. flow, in every respect similar to the ones we can see erupt
in the Hawaiian Islands, Iceland, other basaLtic regions of the earth.
or
Once you recognize the typical appearance of this basalt mesa,y ou will see
that the north slope of RayadoC anyon, too, is in places crownedb y ba.salt
cliffs, but they are less continuous than the southern ones and, as you can
see from several points of vantage, the basalt on the north side of the
canyon overlies the gray Pierre shale.
Foro ver a mile, the trail leads through slope debris, and the
pinef orest doesn ot allow you to get a clearp icture of the geologyo f the
underlyingr ocks. However, reconnaissance work has shown that the Pierre
shale in all probability underlies the canyon. Finally, you pass a large
cliff of a hard rock. With little effort, you can ma,ke out the layers in
this rock, and examination of fresh surfaces will convice you that this
is
not the Pierre shale any m0re.k
.If you recall your observations along the trail leading westward
from Cimarroncito Base Camp, you w i l l see that you encounter the same
sequenceo fr ocks as you go from east to west: first a large of shale,
mass
dipping northeast, away from the mountains (on this trai$, YOU have been
unable to study the a,ttitu.de of the shale layers, but here, too, they dip to
the east and northeast); then, layers of a. hard, gray or yellowish, fine-
*
grained homogeneous rock,d ipping more steeplye astward. If youh ad time,
you could climb up on this steep ledge on the north bank, &d if you follow
it across several other canyons, youw ould come out a.t the ledge by the
Cimarroncito trail, about 1,100 feet west of the Base Camp. The outline of

--- PAGE 43 ---
-3-
that trail did not tell you very much about that rock.B ut I Shall
assume that you have examined ther ockc arefully,b oth at theC imarroncito
trail and this one, and you mayn ow be told that th$S is a very famous
and important formahion:.of the entire Rocky Mountain region, the Dakota
sandstone. Through the Dakotas, Montana.W, yoming, Colorado, Utah, New
Mexico,a nd Arizona, the Creta.ceous shales rest nearly everywhere on this
sandstonef ormation. As you can see in the cliff before you, the beds dip
east at about 30-40 degrees. You can seee xa.ctlyt he same on the east
slope of the Laramie Range in Wyohing, along the entire Front Range of
Colorado, and in the foothills of the Black Hills in South Dalrota.
most sections, the Dakota sandstone is a porous rock.
In
Therefore, it acts like a,wonderful receptacle for rain water that flows
off the east slopes of the Rocky Mounta.ins. The rainwaterf lowsi ntot he
pore spaces of the sandstone, which conducts it along its bedding planes
deeper and deeper intot hee arth'sc rust. If you stand in western
Eebraska, where water is scarce, and drill through the Cretaceous rocks,
you hit the Da.kota sandstone, and since the surface of the Great Plains
is much lower than the surface at the foothills of the Rocky Mountains,
the water in the Dakota sandstone will rush to the surface, cold and
filtered by nature, and provides what is known as flowing wells:
*
You will understand now that the sequence of layered rocks, a.nd their
structure, as you observe and record it in the various canyons on Phil-
mont Ranch, are parts of large and persistent geological plan that
8,

--- PAGE 45 ---
trail, and search both slopes possible outcrops these rocks.
for of
0 Perhaps there are scatterede xposures,p erhapsn ot. It mightb e ne-
cessary to spend several days in such a search, yet you might find
nothing. If you a,re in danger of getting discouraged by sucha ne xperience,
you had better recall an incident in the life of Thomas A. Edison. On
the morning train from Menlo Park to New York,h e used to sit together
witho therp assengers whom he knewO. ne morning, one them said to
of
him: Edison, I have noticed you look a little unhappyn owadays."
"Mr.
Mr.
"Well", said Edison, the past 5 weeks have tried 325 different
"For I
metal filaments hoping to find one that would be incandescent in an
electric bulb. Noto ne of them is." friende xpressed his sympathy
His
with Edison, and the colossal wasteo f time. "What doy ou mean, waste
time?"s hotb ackE dison, "It was no wastea .t all. Now I know that
of
these 325 alloys won't work."
0
If you are wondering what the concealed area may contain,
it may pay you to look up your notes from the Cimarroncito trail. There
below the Dakota sandstone, i. e., west of it, you passed quite a series
gray,g reenish, and purplish shale and sandstoneb eds. You can
of
see noww hy it pay to have complete notes on rock outcrops from every
trip. As a matter fact, these rocks are present in the RayadoC anyon,
of
too, but here happen to bec overed up by the talus debris. The cliff of sand-
stone at which you now are is, course, an older rock than the Dakota
of
sandstone. you don't believe this, draw again a cross-section, as you
If
did at the Cimarroncito trail, draw your skyline, mark W and E in the
usual way, and draw the Dakota sandstone, dipping east at about degrees.
30
Then leave a spaceo fa bout 2,000 feet free, and draw the seconds and-
stone,d ipping at about 45 degreese ast.T his bed, obviously,u nderlies
the Dakota, and it is thereforeo lder.
As you continue west, upR ay&do Creek, outcrops continue to
be few, but after aboutm ile, you will notice chips and boulders
small

--- PAGE 46 ---
-5-
of a reddish and purplishr ock. Keep an eye ont hem.S oony ou pass an
outcrop of thisr ock on thes outh bank of thec reek. It is somewhat
disintegrated but still goode nough to make out its composition. Note and
record whether the rock is layered, about how steeply the layers dip
and in which direction. Prominent in this rock are pink grains with
cleavage,a bout 2-5 millimeters across. Take a few of them into your
hand. If you have a hand lens,o bserve them. Does them ineral have
one cleavage system, more? Right you are, two cleavages ystems,
or
intersecting at about right angles. Other tests you can not well make,
so you may as well know that the mineral is feldspar. In addition, you
~ will probably guess correctly what the many glass-like colorless grains
are. In short, you have a layeredr ock composed for the most part of
I
quartz and feldspar grains. Such a rock is calleda rkose, feldspathic
or
sandstone.
0
It should be clear to you thath t riso ck must have been
derived from some other rock that was particularly rich in these two
I mineralaIsn d . dition, it has many larger pebbles. They, too, are
~
reddish, seem to be aomposed of quartz and feldspar.O thers are dark,
and themselvesl ayered. If you kept youre yes open to all the various
rocks at and near the trail, you w i l l now recall, that yrru have passed
many boulders in the stream bed that fit this description. It seems,
therefore, as if the source rocks for the arkose crop out somewhere west
ana
of you.W atch from now on the boulders in the creek, you can not fail
,
to spot the pink red ones, as well as the dark greenish-gray Layered
or
~
ones, They are altogether different from rocks you have so far seen in
any outcrops. If you kepta ccuraten otes on boulderss eena bout mile,
west of Cimarroncito Base Camp, you will find descriptions that fit your
bouldersh erec loselyA. pparentlyt, h en, a whole formation of rocks i6:
somewhere in the more westerly terrain, but you have not yet seen out-
crops Of it. In geological work, it is important to notice all kinds of

--- PAGE 47 ---
-6-
looseb locks and rock specimens. With experience, you learn to save
much time throughs uchi ncidentalo bservations. No geologisth as so
much time that he could hope to visit every ledge of rock in each region.
He saves time by visiting the largest and most rewarding outcrops, and
by arranging his field trips so that he passes the maximum number of
rockf ormations in the least time. To become acquaintedw ith all the
formations on the Ranch, you know now you must extend your trips farther
west.
At the moment, then, you axew alking across a formation of
arkoses,p urples andstones, and shales. Had you more time to go off the
trail youw ould find numerous outcrops of these rocks, all dipping east.
It is this series of rocks, older-than the Cretaceous system, that you
studied on your trip west gsmarroncito Base Camp.
from
A short distance west, you pass on the north side of the
creek a lmget alus +ope purplish basalt boulders. The rock'c ropso ut
of
at the rim of the canyon, and remains in evidence for several miles.
About at the west end of this talus mass, you can see for-
ward to the right (north canyon wall), several large conical red pro-
montories. As you approach them, between the pines, you seec rags of
grayish color. they are not too far above the trail it may pay you
If
to climb up to one of them.
It is a fair guess that if you had never in your life seen
an automobile, and the first one were shown you after every single bit of
its steel, btass, upholstery,r ubber, and glass had been smashed to bits,
and the whole shapeless imp cemented with Duco, you are not likely to
recognize it as an automobile, to sayn othing of the brand! The ledges
*
you now approach, are exactly this, except that ordinary rocks have been
used. nearly two miles,e verys inglel edge,d espite its resistancet o
For
weathering, turns out to be an extraordinarily crush$& and recemented
rock,
SO utterly distorted and fractured that you can not tell much about it.

--- PAGE 48 ---
-7-
Every block specimen you touch with the hammer, crumbles into tiny bits
or
and slivers, and you quickly realize that this rock has been as completely
smashed as a bottle you hurled against a wall.
If you have never seen such a rock, it is worth while to
examine it carefully, and ponder the situation a few minutes. To crush
for
with a sledge hammer a boulder, about 1 cubic foot in volume, takes a strong
man about 10 minutes. A toughr ock would take much longer. Here, you can
walk completely crushed,rocks for nearly 10,000 feet, and if you have the
along
time you can climb up about 400 feet, and the crushing would not diminish.
If a tunnel were driven into the northern canyon wall, it would encounter
the samem ashed rock for probably more than a mile. And my guess is that the
same contitionc ontinued downward for well over 10 miles. One cubic mile
has 5,280 x 5,280 x 5,280 cubic feet rock. Our strong man would really
of
wear himself out on such a mass.
When you realize the immensev olume of completely crushed rock,
you will understand that a very powerful force must have acted on it. It has.
You can find the story in the huge pyramids that tower high above you. If
you wish to examinet hem, you had better take 2 hours for the trip. If you
have the time, you will enjoy the geology just as much as you will be
annoyed by the inconvenience of passing over large, insecure masses of talus
debris.
In case you don’t have the time to climb up there, I give you
a brief description. About 400 feet above thev alley,t hel edges of breccia
(an Italian name that denotes sharply fractured and recemented rocks) end,
and about 50 feet above bdgin totally different rocks. They are all
volcanic, but of the most diverse kinds. From the distance you can make
e out that they are in crude layers, dipping at about 30 degrees to the
northwest,i ntot he mountain. The layers and lenses are from 3 to 10 feet
more thick. Some consist of solid, darkg ray basalt, othersa rea shes,
or
i. e. millions of volcanic fragments loosely cemented together, but
small

--- PAGE 49 ---
-8-
with abundant pores paces and cavities between. Otherz ones consist of
m g e basaltic fragments, 1 to 5 feet across, some layered, others compact,,
red,& hersg ray black, The whole assemblage forms a huge pile,
some or
like a massivep lug,a bout a mile across. If youw orked your wayu p to these
impressive cliffs, you could look across the canyon, and see before you, to
thes outh,t he large Ocate Mesa. All of it is capped by one immense lava
sheet,a bout 100 feett hick. Where did it come from? You don't see a large
volcanWo e. ll, you stadni dr ectly one.
A volcano, as you can see illustrated on page 21 ofy our
Merit Badgeb ook, has a fe6.cling channel that leads into great depths of the
earth's crust whence all the molten lava and ash came. Volcanoeso f
which you have seen pictures, like Mauna Loa in the Hawaiian Islands, Lassen
Peak in galifornia, or Vesuviusn earN aples, Italy, are activeo nes. They
raise the earth's surface by thee xpelled material. However, like all living
e
things, a volcanoa nd its eruptions die some time. Some volcanoes have
"lived", 5. e. erupted for only a few years.O thersa re a few eentnries
old, probablys everalt housands of years.A fter the last lava and
some
ashes were blown out, an extinct volcano is a mountain no better or worse
than any other mountain, and as such is subject to the remobalo f its rocks
by then ever-ceasingf orces of the atmosphere: rain, wind, frost action,
and the sliding of rocks on steeps urfaces. If enough time has
loose
elapsed to remove all, most, of the volcano proper, the feeding channel w i l l
or
finally be the only part of the edifice that survives. And it will, of course,
survive for a very long time because it leads to very great depths of the
channel. You cann ot tell how high the formerv olcanic pile above may haveb een
just as you can not see the feeding channel of Vesuvius Lassen Peak.
or
*
Only the one the other part of a volcanic center can at one time be
or
exposed to man. Our volcanicp lug,t hen, has aboutt he shape of a vertical
tube, or perhaps a steep-walled funnel, with a diameter of perhaps a mile.
Once the whole Philmont Ranch been surveyed geologically, we w i l l
has know

--- PAGE 50 ---
-9-
the dimensions much more accurately. Perhaps you w i l l be able to contri-
*
bute to knowledgeo f it, As thec rushing of the wall rocks is confined
our
to the vicinity of the volcanic plug, wem ay assume that the first eruption
was such a violent burst that it shattered all rocks within a radius of
about half a mile.
The lava that is part of this plug, is identical with the
basalt south of this canyon,a nd it is almost certain that this plug at
is
least one, perhaps the most important, feeding channel by which the basalt
was extruded that flowed out as a huge sheet to the southward, burying under
itself valleys and hills of that day. It w i l l take many thousandso fy ears
before this lava sheet, too, will'have been removedb y erosion.
When you do geological field work, you are well advised to
take time out, every now and then, (a steep hill are climbing is a
you
good place to do this!), sit down, a d t ry to put together all your observ-
ations and their meaning. At this stage, you cans eet ha.t Geology is an
historical science in the sense that we must fit all observations into a
sequence of events, or a succession of processes. Whether you wish to
understand the meaning of scenery, the formation 0f.a cave, or hope to dis-
cover oil field or a mining claim, the correct understanding the
an of
gradual evolution of every part of the earth's crust is the fundamental
objective. In this respect, Geohogy differs from aJ.1 otherp hysicals ciences.
Without this guiding principle, all your discoveries are like curiosities
of Nature, without rhyme or reason, meaning or consequence.
One conclusion you can draw: If this plug on the north bank
of Rayado Creek fed the lava flows that spread southward, the present
canyonm ust have formed the volcanic eruptions had ceased. W e now have
after
*
several important items that allow to reconstruct the geological history
us
of thisr egion. (1) The basalt, as you saw at the start of thist rip, just
north of Abreu Base Camp, lies above the Cretaceous Pierre shale. That
means it was eruptedl atert hant heC retaceoust ime. (2) The volcanic

--- PAGE 51 ---
-10-
eruptions that produced the great basalt mesa to the south, and smaller
ones east and north of you,m ust have ceased so long ago that in the subse-
quent time the erosion could remove the volcanic pile above the basalt plug,
and Rayado Creek could erode its deep notch across the basaltic rocks, into
theu nderlyingC retaceous strata. (3) Before theC retaceoust ime,s treams
deposited the reddish shale and arkosic debris you saw before you came to
the basalt plug. (4) We know thatt here axe rockse veno ldert hant hese
red arkoses. Very probably,t heya re at the surface some distance west of
the plug, because we have found them as boulders in gayado Creek.
As you climb from the steep basalt talus slopes, and
down
pass again at the base of the gnarled gray ledges, you naturally wonder
what these rocks originally were. This has been a stiff and exerting climb.
And as you have microscope at your disposal yet, you need again a little
no
reward. The breccia. is the first outcropo f the last, oldest formation in
the Ranch,o f which you have seen the red and dark greenish-gray, crystalline
boulders in the creek, and pebbles in the red arkose. Nowhere else will
you encounter these rocks in such a deplorably mashed and crushed conditions.
This can happen, and if you are a novice, you should collect specimens
from such rocks, take them with you, carefully labeled and wraQped in
paper, and keep them future reference. A microscopice xamination would
for
still disclose the mineral composition and nature of these rocks. In fact,
if you continue on the trail toward Rayado Base Camp (also called Fish
Camp),y ou will pass these rocks for many miles where they lend them-
selves much better for close study.

--- PAGE 53 ---
Trail from Webster Pass to RayadoB ase Camp, and on west.
me road to Webster leads through many miles pine
Pass of
forest, which accompanies you from the low elevations at. which you start,
to near some of the highest elevations in the Ranch area, almost 10,000
feet. you observe from the car, the mountains are deeply dissected,
As
high,
ravines and canyon walls are well over a thousand feet and steep.
Between the trees, you rarely see large rock outcrops, but loose boulders
are much in evidence. This is a common condition the southern Rocb
in
Mountains, which makes geological work difficult. To make a reliable
map showing the distribution the various formations, a geologist
of
needs many wenly distributed outcrops. They need not be huge, but
a
they should be large and fresh enough to permit him to identify the
and secure specimens subsequent study.
rocks, for
you must map the rock formations in terrain that has only
If
boulders, you can not detemine the boundaries and limits of the formations
with great accuracy because each boulder may have moved downhill
an unknown
distance its original resting place. Should you, therefore, locate
from
a boulder quartz monzonite porphyry on a hill slope at a known elevation
of
of, say, 7,320 feet, all you can say is that this rock occurs, very
probably, at an elevation x feet higher than 7,320 feet; but howm uch
higher you can not tell. If you axe in a region of many dike rocks, and
you find a loose block such a rock at the intersection of 2 trails, at
of
a trail-stream intersection, any other easily identifiable point on a
or
a
slope, it would not be correct to show an outcrop of that rock at that
i
point on the map.

--- PAGE 54 ---
-49-
You will appreciate, therefore, that the mapping of geological
-
formations at the higher elevations in the area apart the greater
from
-
distance and terrain problems is much difficult and slower than
more
in the relatively open low-elevation country. with the best effort,
Even
the final map is bound to be less reliable than the one the flat
for
Cretaceous shale areas. Nevertheless,p rogress is possible, and on this
trip you will see what rocks underlie most of the higher mountain slopes.
Along the half-mile so where you walk up to Webster Pass
or
from the east, youd o not pass a single outcrop, nor do you see
rock
many boulders. But don't fail to observe the material undery our feet.
Directly as you started out from Cimarroncito Base Camp, noted a
you
small area gravel near the trail. On tbis trip, you constantly
of wlll
be over small bits of rock, mineral fragments, and small,
walking rough
stones. At the moment, you do not how where this debris comes
loose
from,
but you make your usual observations; commoa colors
(1) The of
I .
the fragments.
-
(XU out). (2) If you think you can identify any particular minerals
because you feel sure you have seen them before, and can recognize
down .
specific properties features, write them
or
(3) Common size, shape,a ndd imensions of the fragments.

--- PAGE 55 ---
-50-
After a short distance, you realize that there are about
2
3 different kinds of material. Presumably, you will be inclined to
or
distinguish .&agents of individual minezals from small rock fragments,
each composed of more than one mineral species. If youc ompare this
with what you found when you walked over the slopes of the minette hill,
you w i l l agree that the rock in these Fragments is. definitely coarser-
grained than the minette shale, and not as homogeneous as the brownish-gray
shale. With a little discriaination, you canr ecognizet he two principal
types of material, one dark and shiny, the other granular, of pink, whitish,
- -
yellow and we may as well agree on this one point associated
color,
with quartz.
F'rom Webster Pass, you have a fine view to the south and west.
Through the ti.ees;.you can see the flat skyline of Oca&M esa to the
southward, whereas cliffs of pink and reddish hues are on your side of
the canyon. At the pass, a few feet south of the trail, is your first
outcrop. If youh ave plenty of time,w alko vera nd look it up. you
If
are in ah urry, go You will see better exposures farther down.
on.
Further, your information: The best and most interesting outcrops
for
are directly north andw est of RayadoB ase Camp. It will take you about
an hour to reach the camp from Webster Pass. So try to economize
half
your time so that youh avee nough left; the study of the cliffs by
for
the Camp.
The following information assist you in studying the rocks
will
of the RayadoC anyon area. (1) There arel edges of "red"r ocks, and "dark"
rocks. EQth rocks may appear in one and the same outcrop. (2) A ll rocks
are sufficiently coarse-grained that you can, and should, observe and identify
at least the more common mineralsa ftera little practice. (3) The dark

--- PAGE 56 ---
-51-
e
rocks are practically everywhere layered; the reddish rocks may, or
may not, show layering.
The first outcrop bedrock at the trail is a short distance
of
from the pass. Stop briefly here, and examine it. ther ockl ayered?
Is
If you can recognize layers, record, as usual, the direction in which
the layers dip, anda bout at what angle. Usec ompass or the for
sun
general orientation. If you found layers, do they dip in the
same
airection as the Pierre shale, the Dakota sandstone, and the purple and
reddish sandstones you saw west of Cimarroncito Base Camp, not? This
or
is a very important matter, as you shall see in due time.
Perhaps this small outcrop is not suitable for examining and
answering all these questions. But even if in hurry, make it a point
a
e to stop just a moment here and there, to assure yourself that nothing
for
important in a series of small, inconspicuouso utcrops is missed. If you
were new in this region, and nobody told you that at the Camp there are
better exposures (nobody told me!), you would certainly stop at some length
and obtain all the data you could from even very small showings of rock.
you now proceed along this trail westward to Rayado
As down
Canyon,y ou will note that the outcrops rock, just like the rock
small of
debris east Webster exhibit two different kinds rock: the one
of Pass, of
dark, UsuaLly well layered, commonly with greenish hues, and in some places
full of strongly reflecting scales a mineral already known to you and
of nam e.
tested at some O%&r trip. Fill out the
Not in every single ledge can you see it, but enough it is there to
of
leave little doubt about its identity.
0
The rock, however, is not mica schist as perhaps you are
guessing. biotite mica were the only mineral, you might call
If dark

--- PAGE 58 ---
-53-
Closely associated with these feldspar lenses is quartz, in individual
small grains, glassy and, as usual, without cleavage; in larger,
or
whitish masses and veins. Upon close examination, you will note a few
other minerals the reddish rocks. White or pale yellow to greenish
in
mica (muscovite), also a coal-black mineral at a very few places, of
prismatic shape, and commonly a number these prisms are joined to-
of
gether, like a pencil rays. However, if you fail to find this mineral
of
on this trip, need not be disappointed. Somewhere in the western
you
mountains, along a trail a creek bed, you are likely to pass a block.
or
3W.s black mineral, like qua,rtz, has cleavage, and if you can pry
no
a crystal loose the surrounding rock, it will you its lateral
*om show
faces, six in nmber,J ustl ike a pencil. This is tourmaline. some
In
Rocky Mountain localities, tourmaline crystals over a foot have
long
been found. On PhiSmOnt Ranch property, so far, only small crystaLs
have beenf ound. But keep your eyes open. You may be the one to find
a
larger one.
you follow down the trail to the Camp, you will that
As note
both the dark and the reddish outcrops remain small, say, 2-10 feet
across. Try to figure out their general shape, just as you did with
the quartz monzodte porphyry dikes. And do not neglect to ascertain,
from time to time, the direction in which layers of these rocks dip,
and at what a m e ,
After many turns and loops, the trail brings you to Rayado
Base Camp, at the junction Rayado and Agua Ria creeks.A fter
of
refreshing yourself, and inspecting the luxurious layout this
of
beautiful cmp, we may resum study of the local rocks. Go to
OUT

--- PAGE 59 ---
-54-
Cam p,
the prominent ledges, directly northwest of the back of the
stables, the north bank of Agua Fria canyon.
or on
.If you stand about 300 feet upstream the stables, where
from
the beaver are ponding the water of Agw R i a Creek, and look
dams
northeast, can make out three different rocks. At the lower
you
right (east), just north of the stables, youh ave prominent reddish
ledges over a trail which leads to get past the creek. At the lower
left, you have a lagge ledge of the dark rocks you saw in many outcrops
when you walked Webster down to RayadoB ase Camp. And the
from Pass
upper half of the embankment is occupied by a large group of dark gray
cliffs. may begin to examine the lower left, dark ledge. you
We If
missed the layering in the outcrops by the trail, you will
smaller
certainly agree that this ledge is well layered. Take your time
large
in determining the direction and angle of dip of the layers. you
If
have it, look up what recorded the outcrops along the trail.
you for
If you observed correctly, all your directions should be in good
agreement. The layers dip at about 40 to 55 degrees to the southeast.
If you come to another conclusion, try to discuss it with somebodyw hose
eyes are geologically trained.
All right, if you now stand before this ledge, and realize that
for at least a mile so to the northeast and east all the dark layers
or
of the amphibolite dip to the southeast, you will realize that this is
completely at variance with the northeasterly dip of the Cretaceous
Pierre sues, the Dakota sandstone,a nd also the purplish, green,a nd
gray shales ands andstones that underlie the Dakota sandstone. All
these strata dip uniformly to the northeast and east. supposing
Now
you make another Little experiment with your hands: Hold your right

--- PAGE 60 ---
-55-
hand so that the index finger points diagonally forward to the
left,
horizontally, and let the palm slope away forward to the right.
Ip
you are facing north, your right hand represents tihe Cretaceous layers
that dip at about 35 degrees northeast. hold your hand so that
Now left
your index finger is again horizontal, pointing diagonally forward to the
right. Turn your palm until the back is sloping towards you at about
45 degrees, and let the two palms touch each other. Your left hand
now
represents the dip the scMst masses before youY. ou have
of hornblende
a primitive model of two sets strata, each many thousands feet
of of
thick, but inclined totally different directions. When groups rocks
in of
are in such a relationship, you say that they are unconformable to
each other, that they are separated each other by an unconformity.
or from
Whethery ou will be able to see this unconformity anywhere
in this area, I do not how. I3 has not been described bya ny geologist
yet, a3,though other places in northern New Mexico such contacts
as from
have been reported. Once again, you can see howm uch remains to be done
before all the geologically important facts of this part of the Rocky
Mountains will known and carefully studied. At any rate, try to
be
comprehend that in the CimarronR ange obviously two great blocks of
entirely different rocks are involved, the one, occupying the eastern
slopes, consisting a great series of sedimentary rocks, shales,
of
sandstones,a rkoses,c onglomerates,a nd so forth. I% rests, or leans,
on the high part of the range, and this, as you can see before you,
now
consists of quite different rocks, different in mineralogical composition,
origin, and structure.

--- PAGE 61 ---
Q
far, little has been saabi drotphe u ude tr , palne d,
So
greenish-gray sandstones and shales that underlie the Dakota sandstone.
The age the Cretaceous rocks you in due time be,.able to check
of will
by means of characteristic species fossil animal and plant remains
of
which this system is justly famous.B ut thee xposures of the older
for
purplish strata are poor within the area of the Ranch, and no fossils
have as yet been found. Fortunately, in surrounding districts enough
information has been gathered to permit the conclusion that these rocks
were formed during the Jurassic, Triassic, Permian, and possibly the
Pennsylvanian periods. In your Merit Badgeb ook, on page 2, you will
find out about ago this was. will understand that we
how long You
are dealing here with older periods in the earth's history than the
e Cretaceous. Now the really important thing is that occasionally the
streams of these older periods already rolled pebbles of the same
rocks that the present Cimasron range. This shoould give you
form
pause to reflect on an important matter: In magazinesa nd books of
general. information, you find statements that so-and-so many million
years ago, in a certain part of North America, there a large volcano,
was
a glacier, a mountain range, an am of the ocean. Very rarely do the
or
writers add how that is proved. But geologists must, of oourse, constantly
look aC the evidence when they try to reconstruct events in history
the
of an area. this particular region, you can say that the rocks
For
which large cliffs in front of you, and which apparently crop out
form
over a very large portion these high mountains, must also have stood
of
at the earth's surface during these periods, so that streams
older

--- PAGE 63 ---
! -5&
I
As a matter fact, the present and Sangre de
of Cimarron
Cristo Ranges seem to have been at least as large and as high as
they are now. If you drive on S. ighway No. 64 EagleN est
U. from
to Taos, you pass over 12 miles some the same strata the
for of on
-west slope of the range. Here they are not as coarse as some the
of
conglomerates in Philmont, but there are thousands feet of them,
of
and if stop often enough, you can collect many well preserved
you
fossils in these sandstones and shales. The ranget herefore must
have been a highland that provided the streams that time with all
of
the debris to buiM up large piles of sedimenta round it. Every
mountain range at the present time acts the samew ay as a source
in
area stream &bris.
for
e The picture a high mountain range that stood here back
of
als o ng ago as the Pennsylvaniapn e riod, is onlay momentary glimpse
into the geologic past this part New Mexico. It would be wrong
of of
to assume that the Cimarron Range has been a mountain range ever since
the Pennsylvanianp eriod. Some time after the Pennsylvanian streams
flowed this range, the land probably sank, and quite a different
off
sceneryf ollowed. But we are getting ahead ours tory.L et return
of us
to the ledges front us.
In of
Before are still the ledges amphibolite and the red rocks.
us of
It is time now to find out something about their origin and nature.
Geologists long before your time have tried to obtain fossils from
amphibolites. They are so well layeredt heys uggests edimentaryr ocks.
The layers appear quite undisturbed, and fossil shells might therefore
be preserved. All these attempts have failed. It is the same with
e
mica schist, and in some the dark ledgesi nF ria Canyon there
of

--- PAGE 64 ---
-59-
is so little hornblende that the rock could be called a mica schist.
a geologist finds a fossil in mica schist, he writes forthwith
If 89
article announcing this remarkable fact. He publishes a photopaph
of it, his friends are likely to drop in him to see the remarkable
and on
find. Yet mica schist and amphibolites underlie many thousands of square
miles in every continent.
It has taken geologists a long time before they figured out
just why these rocks lack fossils. we can observe the conditions
If
that produce, say, a cubic yard dune sand, a ton mud gravel,
of or of or
we can pretty well understand these rocks have formed a larger
how on
scale in nature. However, schist hornblende schist has yet
no mica or
formed under the eyes of human beings, and experiment has yet suc-
no
cessfully produced theser ocks. There arer easons this. Nearly
for
all the rocks you see are composed of minerals in which silica,
or
the oxide the element silicon (SiOZ), is the most important single
of
cons6ituent. (chis oxide, when pure, appears as quartz, and you have
seen it in many pbces. But as silica combines with other elements to
form morec omplex silicates, it imparts to them the unpleasant property
requiring very hi& temperatures to form crystals. Furthermore,
of
most of these crystals grow extremely slowly, and some have, so
far,
refused to form any crystals under laboratory conditions.
You need not go into this detail, but two things are
all
worth remembering: (1) Nearly all them ineralsi nt her ockb efore
you require temperatures above the boiling point of water to form:
(2) Rocks, like mica schist andh ornblende schist, not form where
do
volcanic lava has acted ordinary surface rocks, although a rock like
on

--- PAGE 65 ---
-60-
a
the Cretaceous hornfels, west of Cimarroncito Camp, has some minerals
in common with hornblende schist and mica schist.
Many schists and amphibolites have been chemically analyzed,
and it is known that a mica schist has the same chemical composition
(and also the layered structure) as mud and shale. There is very
same
good evidence to show that a shale will be brought into relatively
if
deep levels of the earth's crust, say, 4 5 miles below the surface,
or
it be under sufficient heat and compression to start growing
will
mica flakes; and if the shale had a certain amount lime, it will
of
developb oth mica anda mphibole crystals. Our hornblende schist and
mica schist have almost certainly gone through such a process, and
rocks of this kind are spokeno f as "metamorphosed rocks". Metamorphosed,
in Greek,m eans changed shape", and refers to the changed crystal
"of
fabric. The formerly powdery, fine-grained mud shale is now composed
or
of large enough flakes mica so you can reco@ize individual crystals.
of
You understand, then, that the frail shells of bivalves
will
or other are not likely to preserve their shape the entire
fossils if
substance the rock has been so thoroughLy changed. This is thought
of
to be the main reason fossils in metamorphosed rocks are excessively
why
rare. Yet a few have been found in various parts the world, and they
of
prove that many metamorphosed rocks are the same, of younger age
of or
than ordinary unmetamorphosed sedimentaryr ocks. Some time ago, it was
thought that metamorphosed rocks are very old. This has been disproved
d l
in recent years. A good many metamorphosed rocks are but others are
old,
not so old. The matter must be examined in eachr egion, and juQed
on
its evidence.
own

--- PAGE 66 ---
-61-
e
So much the dark schifisnr to nt you. you walk
for of As
up Agua Fria Canyon, you will pass manym ore ledges it, all
on, of
dipping at intermediate angles to the southeast, and you will realize
that this is a huge system steeply tilted metamorphosed sedimentary
of
rocks.
How old are they? To this question a geologist can not
always give a direct answer, just as you can not if youm eet an
unlmown
man thes treet. But canu se somce o mmon sense. The man certainly
on you
is not a baby any more because he walks his own legs: and he walks
on
along quite briskly so he is probably not yet over seventy. We apply
the same reasoning whenw e try to figure out the age a new rock.
of
We may not bow its exact age, but may how that it is younger or
e
older than some other rocks whose age we dok now. Do a little thiang,
then, and write down your best guess.
Noww ce o me to the red rock, in front your right. W e
on
have been staring at this cliff for so a time, we should be
long off
to examine it. But it may be as well to stay at the observation point
another minute, because the story the red rock is not so simple.
for of
The rock itself, as you have found out by now, is a rather coarse-grained
aggregate pink and yellowish feldspar crystals, with much less quartz
of
mica,
in irregular grains or larger masses, plus still less either mtzsco-
vite or the dark biotite. Rocks having this mineralc omposition, may be
called granite although, when the grains are as coarse as they are in our
ledge, most geologists call them pegmatite. Don't worry about that name.
It is derived from a Greek gadget used the stage, but we need not go
on
into all this.

--- PAGE 67 ---
-
62-
e
Now as yeox uam ine tlhe ed ges, you wifli ln d ththa et red
rockw, hethecr o arse- fine-graineda, ppears as lensesi n and
or
between the amphibolite. You can also see true dikes of the pink rock,
instance, in the cliffs on your left. They break across the layers
for
of the hornblende schist. Remembering your experience with the quartz
monzonite porphyry, you will consider them volcanic rocks, and about 1.50
years ago, it was assumed that if volcanoes of the earth had been
all
visited, and their eruptions and lava studied, some would be discovered
do,
that erupted granite lava. But there are none that and wne owk now
that there probably never were any that did. Instead, many volcanoes
have been found that produce a lava that resembles gauite in composition,
but nowhere are such volcanic eruptions actually connected with masses
e
of ganite. The rocks carefully avoide acho ther. enormous
two An
amount of work has been expended during the last 100 years to solve this
riddle the granite. It is, however, so complex that to this day the
of
complete answer is not known.
the rocks in PhiUnont Ranch, you can and should make the
For
followingo bservations: (1) Theirm ineralc omposition is nearly every-
where the same, and quite simple; (2) The majorityo ft heg raniteo utcrops
-
are massiver ocks. they are layered, the layers conform to the layers
If
of nearby schist and amphibolite; (3) Occasionally, stringers and dike-like
offshoots extend from a granite pegmatite lens across the rocks,
or dask
and in dark rocks you find thin nests, and quite irregularly
some films,
shaped bodies the pink rock. They may be coarse-grained, medium-grained,
of
compact, faintly layered; (4) ~nso me outcrops, you can not draw sharp
or

--- PAGE 68 ---
-63-
boundaries between the red and dark Instead, the white or
rock.
pinkish feldspar grains are scattered through the dark rock in all
proportions and without sharp boundaries. When you stand in front
a true dike granite that cuts across the layers schist, you
of of of
can hardly fail to assume that the granite was something like a liquid
that was forced into a fissure the dark rock, and pried the walls
of
apart, an inchh ere, maybe more there. Tlzis interpretation is still
favored by many geologists, and outcrops like these justify the belief
that at least some granite is a liquid, deep in the crust the earth,
of
that rush into any available spaces of the surrounding rocks.
will
However, as you read before, liquid granite has never been observed
to flow out at the surface the earth. it seems to break i-nto
of As
other rocks, but falls to extrude at the earth's surface, such material,
when solidified, is called "intrusive" rock,w hereas volcanic lava
an
that does break through the crust, is cailed an "extrusiv&' rock.
These somewhat lengthy comments have been given here because
the study metamorphosed and intrusive rocks is muchm ore difficult
of
than that of ordinary sedimentary and volcanic rocks. you walk from
As
one ledge to another, and pass the endless succession of irre@;ular masses
granite, pegmatite, mixed rocks, on the canyon slopes you will
of or
remember the contrast between the simple layers the Pierre sWe,
of
the purplish sandstone, the gray Dakota sandstone, and these meta-
or
morphosed rocks, complex in origin and variable in composition and texture.
In this part New Mexico,h owever, the amphibolites, schists, and granite
of
varieties are the most ancient rocks. They underlie the cores of the

--- PAGE 69 ---
-64-
Sangre de Cristo, Cimarron, andT ruchasr anges,a ndc ontinue as a
huge complex in the Front Range of Colorado. Many striking mineral
localities and many deposits economically important metal. m2nerals
of
have been found in these rocks, though not within the area of Philmont
Ranch.
3LT you have examined the many ledges of the dark, schistose
amphibolite, and the numberous lenses and stringers of red granite, and
if youh ave some strength left, you can examine the third ledge you
saw from youro bservationp oint at the beaver dams. Remember: the
top of the cliff north of them looks quite different from the meta-
morphosed rocks underneath. A brief visit to that ledge is well mirth
while.
You climb to the top of the red granite-pegmatite, and the
red color of the loose blocks ceases. M y g rayo nes lie around, some
firm, others full of holes and pore spaces. If you have previously
walked along the trail from AbreuB ase Camp to Rayado Canyon, end
studied the great volcanic Psug the north side, you w llifeel like
on
a veteran from the WorLd W a r who condescends to take a shot gun and
shoot a squirrel. At any rate, yow geologically trained eyes will
spot at once the texture and firm composition of this gray rock as
typical of the basalt that underlies Ocate) Mesa, south across the Agva
Fria Canyon. Right you are. This is basalt. walk to the base of
Now
the cliff. it all firm basal.t? -st, butn otq uite. you
Is If
walk slowly around the base of the cliff, you will find a Pew small
showings of basalt-tuff. A tuff is volcanic ash, cemented together.

--- PAGE 70 ---
Some a firm, strong rock, some is so of gas cavities that
forms full
it is little more than loose bits rock. The tuff lenses at the base
of
of the lava cliff slope at about degreesn orthwest. (You had better
30
verify this. Never believe anything without first checking up on it.)
To that exten+,, they do the same as the ash and tuff layers at the
south base the large plug, west AbreuB ase Camp. But obviously,
of of
the rest the cliff is a muchm ore modest affair. youh ave time,
of If
walk north, always along the eastern base the basalt cliff. The
on of
going is a bit slow, but after some feet you come to the end of
300
the ledge. While you are up there, take a good look across Rayah
Creek to the northeast. There are some interesting-lookingo utcrops,
at exactly the same elevation as the base ofy our basalt cliff.
Do
not hesitate to go up there if there is time.
You can retrace your steps, following the basalt leages back
to the north bank Agua F’ria Canyon, and as you do, you will realize
of
that this mass of basalt is quite small, perhaps 400 feet or so from
west to east. you were at the large plug, you will recall the in-
If
teresting speculation wem ade there in regard to the age of the basalt,
and how old how recent Rayado Creek might be. You can see that this
or
placeh erei nvolvest he same problem. Across the canyon,y ouh ave the
immense mass mesa basalt. Herey ou stand at about the same level
of
as the base of that mesa, but in between is that deep ravine.
How do
you explain it?
The tuff at the base of our basalt cliff maym ean that the
first eruption started as an explosion of ash, and then a Barge basalt
flow followed and buried it. But it is probably not necessary to assume

--- PAGE 71 ---
-66-
8
that this basalct l iff is anothepr l ug feeding channel the
or of
basalt extrusions. Certainly the red granite and dark amphibolite
ledges underneath show nothing comparable to the extreme crushing
you saw at the base the large basalt plug.
of
As you inspect the basalt ledge that faces the stream, you
noticev ertical columns. Basalt all overt hew orld shows this. The
columns tend to point at right angles to a surface that cooled the
basalt when it erupted.T herefore, vertical columns above a
form
flat cooling surface; horizontal columns demand a vertical cooling
surface. 'R.y to figure out what kind a shape( and there is a
of
-
name it!) a mass basalt must have to show horizontal columns.
for of
A familiar analogue of columnar basalt is cracked md in a dried-up
e puddle.% re,t oo, the mud columns are at right angles to the cooling
surface. Both features have in common that %he substance has shrunken.
The mud loses its water; the cooling basalt lava loses a large volume
associated gas and steam.
of
As you walk back from Rayado Base Camp to Webster you
Pass,
notice by the trail quite a few blocks basaltic lava. you
will of If
have extra time, climb up, some 400 feet after leaving the campY . ou
find more cliffs of volcanic rocks there, and may find it interesting
will
-
to determine the shape these masses. Ponder another point: the
of If
basalt cliff the north bank Agws Fria Canyon is not a remnant
on of of
a feeding channel, how did the basut get there?
* .

--- PAGE 73 ---
-67-
This section of the trail gives a typical picture of the principa1
types of crystalline rocks that underlie the core of the Cimarron Range.
The trail, accompanying the creek, follows a southeasterly direction,
whereas all the layered rocks strike northeast-southwest (or nearly so).
Thus the trail is a true cross-section, across the strike of the bedrock
formations. elsewhere in the crystalline rocks of the Cimarron Range,
As
two principal rock types make their appearance: (1) Dark greenish-gray
amphibolites (or hornblende schists), and (2) pink or light gray granite
(in places layered, or foliated), blending commonly into the coarse-grained
varieties known as pegmatite. These two rocks constitute, for the most
' *
part, a great system of parallel layers and lenses. There are practically
no complications, and both structure and mineral composition of the rocks
are easily learned.
The first ledge, about 1,000 feet southeast of Rayado Camp, on the
southwest side of the trail, shows well layered, typical amphibolite, with
layers dipping at about 25 degrees south. Some layers are darker and
coarser than others. This is due to more amphibole (or hornblende4 both
terms denote the same dark greenish to black, prismatic mineral) and less
of the light-colored minerals quartz, and white mica (muscovite). Two
pink to maroon pegmatite lenses, 1-2 feet thick, are parallel to the
amphibolite layers. This is almost the only ledge in which the amphibolite
*
is slightly folded.

--- PAGE 74 ---
-68-
About 300 feet southeast, in the trail, the amphibolite layers dip at
about 45 degrees southeast, and are accompanied on the northwest by a large
pegmatite mass, partly in the creek bed. Prominent joints dip at about 60
degrees northeast. Here and in subsequent outcrops, it might be well to
point out the great importance of fractures in rocksf or the circulation of
ground water and other solutions in the earth's surface.
The rocks in this ledge continue across the creek ina large cliff.
"Last Mile Bridge". On the left (NE) side of the creek is a large ledge of
pink pegmatite, accompanying amphibolite, some layers of which are rotten
and brown, due to oxidation of the iron compounds in the hornblende and black
e
mica (biotite). The pegmatite is conveniently located fora study ofits
principal minerals, and their identification. Nearly all the pegmatites in
this area have two varieties of feldspar: the pink potash feldspar,
or
orthoclase, and the white soda-lime feldspar,. or plagioclase. Occasionally,
the pink feldspar in pegmatites shows wavy, white or grayish, thin zones. This
variety is by a special name, perthite. The thin wavy zones are very
known
thin plates andf ilms of plagioclase within the more voluminous orthoclase.
It is generally thought that when these crystals originally formed, they were
homogeneous. But upon cooling, the two different types of molecules separated
into these thin films. It can also happen that white feldspar is the potash-bearing
variety, but where pink feldspar is present, the white one is nearly always
.I)
plagioclase. Gross gate in wire fence.A bove it, ont hen orth side of the
'

--- PAGE 75 ---
canyon, are large pegmatite cliffs. They are steeply dipping lenticular
masses that reach nearly all the way up the slope.
150 feet southeast, the trail crosses over to the southwest side of
the creek. Soon afterwards, the north bank exposes large plates of dark
gray amphibolite, dipping at 60-70 degrees southeast. This is a very
characteristic view of the structure of the amphibolite formation in this
entire canyon area. Each layer, 1 or more feet thick, can be followed
along its course for over 100 feet. Note that these layers are merely tilted
not folded, If folds were present, one would almost certainly see the places
(apices) where the layers bend arountdh e There are apparently no
axis.
such places anywhere around.
After an interval of about 1,000 feet where thet rail runs over talus
debris, it skirts a steep ledge of pegmatite on the south bank of the creek.
Here the rock is layered in places. The layers dip at about 30 degrees to
the southwest. At the southeast end of this ledge, the trail crosses over to
the north bank. The pegmatite continues here, and shows many large feldspar
crystals. The reflecting cleavage surfaces reach the size of a man’s
palm.
At the ford, there is a light gray quartzose lens in the pegmatite. Just
possibly this is a small mass of a former sandstone, metamorphosed to
quartzite, and so thoroughly soaked by the pegmatite that some feldspar got
into it. The rock might be called a quartzose gneiss. This rock continues

--- PAGE 76 ---
-70-
for some 120 feet downstream on the north bank. The rock shows well
developed layers, and they dip in the usual direction, to the southeast,
at about 75 degrees. The resistant rock makes a prominent reef in Rayado
Creek. Note also the sharp fractures. Nearly all brittle rocks have them.
Farther southeast, the quartzose gneiss is interlayered with dark,
thin amphibolite layers, and this rock increase.si n volume farther southeast.
At one place, where the trail skirts the steep northern fronto f a prominent
ledge, many loose slabs of amphibolite show nicely the individual hornblende
crystals, as black thin needles., about 1/8-inch long. They show best in
light-colored, muscovite-rich blocks, and here and there, the hornblende
needles are concentrated in little radiating clusters, set in the white,
e
glistening micaceous base.
The trail crosses and recrosses the creeka t short intervals now.
Near the east end of this large group of steep ledges is a beaver dam
(incomplete as yet), and the creek makes a sharp right-angle curve, turning
from east to south. At the knee of the stream, fine-grained pink gneiss dips
at about 30 degrees south.
Again, the trail crosses the stream at short intervals because so
many steep cliffs are crowded togethern ow that there is not much room for
the trail. Many of these ledges display typical, coarsely crystalline
pegmatites, and it is impossible to overlook the many large cleavage fragments
*
of feldspar. It will be noted that all larger cleavage surfaces are composed
of individual, small surfaces that have nearly, but not quite, the same
orientation. Such "mosaics" are the normal thing in rocks that have gone

--- PAGE 77 ---
-7 1-
through deformation and uplift. The originally large and uniform crystals
have been strained, not quite enough to rupture each crystal, but enough to
dislocate nearly every individual internally. The microscope shows that
these small dislocations go to much smaller dimensions.
Farther east, amphibolite reappears, striking northeast, but dipping
to the southeast as well as to the northwest, and near the eastern end of
the tract, the rock becomes massive and somewhat coarser-grained, with
many small pink crystals, probably orthoclase.
r”
At this point, it may be well to explan to the Scouts what an amphibolite
[I
is. Chemically, these rocks agree closely with the composition of basalt
lava, but also with that of calcareous shales. In other words, where rocks
e
have been metamorphosed (and all amphibolites are metamorphosed rocks),
two rocks of entirely different origin can give rise to the same metamorphosed
rock.. It is always desirable in geology to ascertain the origin of rocks. This
ledge of massiv? amphibolite helps. A calcareous shale is a sedimentary, i. e.
layered rock. Although the process of metamorphism replaces the original
minerals of the sediment with another mineral association, .it rarely can do
away entirely with the layered structure of a sedimentary rock. A massive
amphibolite, therefore, is suggestive evidence that the rock was not a sedimentary
rock to begin with, but a basaltic one. Although some basalt lava is also
layered, this is the exception, and not the rule. On ihe highway S. Highway
(U.
*
west of the Palisades of the Cimarron, there are many fine outcrops
64),
showing amphibolites grading into fine-grained basalt that has only slightly
been metamprphosed. Therefore, there are 2 lines of evidence for the basaltic

--- PAGE 78 ---
-72-
origin of these particular amphibolites. Well layered amphibolites can
also be of basaltic origin, in the sense that they may represent metamorphosed
-
basalt ash, ort uff, which is commonly layered.
At the east end of the massive amphibolite, many pink granite
lenses penetrate the rock, which here becomes again better foliated, or
layered. The trail now crosse's over to the south side of the stream, and
climbs over a large mass of pegmatite, with pink and white feldspar, and
a more generous admixture of white mica (muscovite) than is common here.
Biotite and quartz are also present.
At the east end of this pegmatite promontory is an obsolete shelter
e
on the right side of the creek. About 80 feet southeast of the shelter, on .
the right bank of Rayado Creek, the southern contact of the pegmatite mass
is exposed. The surface dips at about 55 degrees north and the pegmatite
rests on fine-grained feldspathic gneiss that has the regional southeasterly
dip. Its layers are cut by the contact. Directly opposite the shelter,
off
on the northeast side of the creek, a white quartz vein of irregular shape
is
in the pegmatite ledge.
The trail crosses on a wooden log bridge over to the north bank of
the creek, and pegmatite with much muscovite continues there. Pink fine-
grained gneiss is exposed east of the pegmatite. Some feet east, on the
100
north bank of the creek, and directly by the trail, can be seen the floor contact

--- PAGE 79 ---
-73-
of an irregularly shaped pegmatite, which rests ont he fine-grained gneiss.
300 feet east, the trail crosses to the south side at a steep rocky
gorge. Pegmatite is again the most prominent country rock, and about
ZOO feet east, on the north bank, is a steep tan-colored pyramid of pegmatite
and fine-grained gneiss, nearly ZOO feet high. Only loose blocks are on the
south side where the trail goes; but about 150 feet farther east, pink fine-
grained quartzose gneissi s passed in the trail.
About 40 feet downstream, the trail crosses over to the north bank.
Yellow, rotten gneiss, with amphibolite zones, strikes northeast-southwest
here, dipping at about 75 degrees southeast. The amphibolite from here on
e
east looks crushed, and chunks of it appear in twisted position in the pegmatite.
This the last outcrop in whicht he crystalline rocks exhibit their
is
normal features. On the north bank, east of here, appears the west end of
the huge talus pile that strews the southern slopes of the great volcanic plug,
which culminates in the two spectacular pyramids of brick-red color. Several
outcrops of the crystalline rocks are passedj ust north of the trail, and despite
the immense cliff surfaces it will be very difficultf or anyone to recognize
the familiar amphibolite, fine-grained gneiss, or pegmatite. rocks have
All
been crushed by the force of the volcanic eruptions that blew the lava and ash
through the crust of the earth, and every single ledge is shattered by thousands
of cracks, even though the rocks hold together fai?ly well. In a few of these

